---
title: "Valerie De Ana - Research"
layout: textlay
excerpt: "Valerie De Anda -- Research"
sitemap: false
permalink: /research/
---

# Research and Projects

# Previous 

## Developing  in silico approaches to evaluate the metabolic machinery and network  interactions of microbial communities in response to environmental change

Changes in the environment caused by human development are severely impacting ecosystems all over the world and yet, the associated impacts on microbial communities are often overlooked. Evaluating the role of microbial communities is critical to understand how perturbations in the environment alter essential biogeochemical reactions that support life on our planet. However, microbial communities are rarely included in studies on biogeochemistry, ecology, climate change, and land-use, and are therefore underrepresented in policy that drives conservation and management decisions. While it is recognized that metabolite exchanges between microbial communities control ecological interactions framing ecosystem diversity and stability, systematic methods to quantify microbial levels of inter-species competition and cooperation are lacking to date. Moreover, it is unclear whether anthropogenic perturbations influence microbial community dynamics and if so, what are the patterns in response to disturbance and is it possible to predict them using computational tools?
The main goal of my doctoral dissertation was to identify microbial community patterns that can be used as bioindicators to signal changes in ecosystem state caused by anthropogenic environmental disturbance. My dissertation research included four chapters to achieve this goal. The objective of chapter one was to develop an in silico approach to measure the metabolic machinery involved in several key biogeochemical cycles (C, N, O, S, and Fe) for entire microbial communities. These measurements can in turn be used to build predictive models to understand microbial community dynamics and their response to environmental disturbance. The focus of  chapter two was to identify a microbial mat ecological model that can be used to understand patterns in key metabolical or ecological processes under environmental stress. Chapter three was a literature review and data synthesis effort to describe the anthropogenic pressures occurring at our study site, Cuatro Cienégas Basin (CCB), a naturally isolated valley in the Chihuahuan Desert (Coahuila) in Mexico. CCB is a World Wildlife Fund (WWF) hotspot for biodiversity and an internationally recognized wetland. However, water extraction to meet the growing demands of irrigation for agriculture has drastically decreased lagoon water levels in recent years. This region is now facing extreme desiccation, which exerts physical and chemical stresses on the biota thriving in lagoon ecosystems. Here I highlight the value of using network inference approaches to understand the response of microbial communities to environmental perturbation. In chapter four, I used time-series, spatially-resolved, analysis to understand the relationships among microbial taxa and their metabolic capabilities in lagoons undergoing desiccation. This computational approach synthesized tools developed over the course of my dissertation: (1) an algorithm to capture the fluctuations of key biogeochemical cycles over time; (2) information about the microbial metabolic pathways inherent to microbial mat ecology; and (3) network inference to examine the relationships between microbial taxa under environmental stress.
 The following paragraphs describe the outcome and main conclusions of my dissertation efforts. In chapter one, I developed and implemented an open-source computational software, MEBS (Multi-genomic Entropy-Based Score), to evaluate several major biogeochemical cycles (C, N, O, S, and Fe) across spatio-temporal scales. MEBS generates a single informative entropy value and thus provides a quantifiable metric to compare shifts in microbial metabolic pathways caused by environmental perturbation. As a case study, we applied MEBS to the sulfur cycle because it is one of the most metabolically and ecologically complex biogeochemical cycles on Earth. Here, we developed a comprehensive analysis of the metabolic machinery involved in the sulfur cycle at a global scale, including biotic and abiotic processes involved in the mobilization of sulfur compounds via microbial-catalyzed chemical reactions. In chapter two, we proposed a “microbial mat ecological model,” describing how these multi-layered, self-sustaining, microbial communities interact to maintain a stable and highly functional ecosystem. In chapter three, we examined shifts in the structure of microbial species and their relationships caused by extreme desiccation, and how microbial community structure relates to network assemblage. Finally, in chapter four, we propose the implementation of a three-pronged approach to complement current techniques in microbial taxonomic ecology: (1) the analysis of robust time-series ecological networks (TS-ENs), which was developed here as an open-software package called NetAn (Network Analyzer) to evaluate the different taxonomic levels needed to assess general microbial community relationships; (2) the application of MEBS to capture the enrichment of biogeochemical cycles or other complex metabolic pathways, which was implemented here as a quantifiable metric to determine microbial community metabolic response to environmental perturbation; and (3) the use of network motifs of biological networks, which have been widely applied to study neuronal networks and ecological food webs, but have not yet been applied in  microbial ecological studies.
The results of my dissertation demonstrate that the mechanisms affecting the stability of microbial mats are linked to (1) the degree of negative interactions during perturbation, (2) the degree that microbial groups interact with each other, creating a large “seed pool” of genetic and taxonomic diversity to perform multiple metabolic functions, and (3) the presence of keystone microorganisms, which carry out essential functions in the community. This is the first study to incorporate network motifs to analyze the ecology of microbial mats under environmental perturbation. Further studies are needed to examine whether the network motifs here are specific to microbial mats in our lagoon systems or are also present in other environments under perturbation. To better understand why some motifs are found in high or low abundances within our microbial mats, we need to further explore the mathematical properties of such networks motifs, but also design experiments of direct microbial interactions to obtain ecological information of the generalist and specialist microbe species in each node.
Assessing the community-wide implications of environmental perturbation and the shifts in microbial network interactions is a critical step towards improving knowledge of the response of microorganisms to anthropogenic and climate-linked change. By implementing MEBS, network inference, and the distribution of network motifs in other microbial communities, we can identify correlations between microbial community dynamics and ecosystem processes that govern their functional stability. We propose that MEBS can be used to understand the microbial-metabolic response to any kind of environmental perturbation, such as those associated with the immediate and on-going threats of ocean acidification, pollution, land-use, and climate change. In applying MEBS, we can gain new information about the changes in microbial-mediated biogeochemical cycles and the cascading impacts throughout entire ecosystems. The use of robust time-series analysis coupled with entropy-based scores, in situ field studies, ecological taxonomic diversity indices, and modeling would be a powerful approach to predict microbial behavioral response. 



<br />
<br />
